where do you come from
it's such a simple question but these
days of course simple questions bring
ever more complicated answers people are
always asking me where i come from
and they're expecting me to say india
and they're absolutely right and so far
as 100 of my blood
and ancestry does come from india except
i've never lived one day of my life
there i can't speak
even one word of its more than 22
000 dialects so i don't think i've
really earned the right
to call myself an indian and if where do
you come from means where were you born
and
raised and educated then i'm entirely of
that funny little country known as
england
except i left england as soon as i
completed my undergraduate education
and all the time i was growing up i was
the only kid in
all my classes who didn't begin to look
like the classic english heroes
represented
in our textbooks and if where do you
come from means where do you pay your
taxes where do you see your doctor and
your dentist
then i'm very much of the united states
and i have been
for 48 years now since i was a really
small child
except for many of those years i've had
to carry around this funny little pink
card with
green lines running through my face
identifying me as a permanent alien
and i do actually feel more alien the
longer i live there
and if
where do you come from means which place
goes deepest inside you
and where do you try to spend most of
your time
then i'm japanese because i've been
living as much as i can for the last 25
years
in japan except all of those years i've
been there on a tourist visa and
i'm fairly sure not many japanese would
want to consider me
one of them and i say all this
just to stress how very old-fashioned
and straightforward
my background is because when i go to
hong kong or sydney or
vancouver most of the kids i meet are
much more international and
multicultural than i am
and they have one home associated with
their parents but
another associated with their partners a
third
connected maybe with the place where
they happen to be fourth connected with
the place they dream of being
and many more besides and their whole
life will be spent
taking pieces of many different places
and putting them together into a stained
glass hole
home for them is really a work in
progress it's like a project on which
they're constantly adding
upgrades and improvements and
corrections
and for more and more of us home has
really
less to do with a piece of soil than
you could say with a piece of soul if
somebody suddenly asks me where's your
home
i think about my sweetheart or my
closest friends or the songs that travel
with me
wherever i happen to be and i'd
always felt this way but it really came
home to me as it were
some years ago when i was climbing up
the stairs in my parents house
in california and i looked through the
living room windows
and i saw that we were encircled by
70-foot flames
one of those wildfires that regularly
tear through the hills of
california and many other such places
and three hours later that fire had
reduced my home
and every last thing in it except for me
to ash and when i woke up the next
morning i was sleeping
on a friend's floor the only thing i had
in the world was a toothbrush i just
bought from an
all-night supermarket of course if
anybody asked me then
where is your home i literally couldn't
point to any physical construction
my home would have to be whatever i
carried around inside me
and in so many ways i think this is a
terrific liberation
because when my grandparents were born
they pretty much had their sense of home
their sense of community even their
sense of enmity
assigned to them at birth and didn't
have much chance of stepping outside of
that
and nowadays at least some of us can
choose our sense of home
create our sense of community fashion
our sense of self and in so doing maybe
step a little beyond some of the black
and white divisions
of our grandparents age no coincidence
that the president
of the strongest nation on earth is half
kenyan
partly raised in indonesia has a chinese
canadian brother-in-law
the number of people living in countries
not their own
now comes to 220 million
and that's an almost unimaginable number
but it means
that if you took the whole population of
canada and the whole population of
australia
and then the whole population of
australia again and the whole population
of canada again
and doubled that number you would still
have fewer people than belong to this
great floating tribe
and the number of us who live outside
the old nation state categories
is increasing so quickly by 64 million
just in the last 12 years that soon
there will be more of us than there are
americans
already we represent the fifth largest
nation
on earth and in fact in canada's largest
city toronto
the average resident today is what used
to be called
a foreigner somebody born in a very
different country
and i've always felt that the beauty of
being surrounded by the foreign
is that it slaps you awake you can't
take anything
for granted travel for me is a little
bit like being in love because suddenly
all your senses are at the setting
marked on suddenly you're alert to the
secret patterns
of the world the real voyage of
discovery as marcel proust famously said
consists not in seeing new sights but in
looking
with new eyes and of course once you
have new eyes
even the old sites even your home
becomes something different
many of the people living in countries
not their own are refugees
who never wanted to leave home and ache
to go back home but for the fortunate
among us i think the age of movement
brings exhilarating new possibilities
certainly when i'm traveling especially
to the major cities of the world the
typical person
i meet today will be let's say a half
korean
half german young woman living in paris
and as soon as she meets a half thai
half canadian young guy
from edinburgh she recognizes him as
kin she realizes that she probably has
much more in common with him
than with anybody entirely of korea or
entirely of germany
so they become friends they fall in love
they move
to new york city and
or edinburgh and the little girl who
arises
out of their union will of course be not
korean or german or french or thai
or scotch or canadian or even american
but a wonderful and
constantly evolving mix of all those
places
and potentially everything about the way
that young woman
dreams about the world writes about the
world
thinks about the world could be
something different
because it comes out of this almost
unprecedented blend
of cultures where you come from now is
much less important
than where you're going more and more of
us are rooted in the future or the
present tense
as much as in the past and home we know
is not just the place where you happen
to be born
it's the place where you become yourself
and yet there is one great
problem with movement and that is that
it's really hard
to get your bearings when you're in
mid-air some years ago i noticed that
i had accumulated one million miles on
united airlines alone
you all know that crazy system six days
in hell
you get the seventh day free and
and i began to think that really
movement was only as good
as the sense of stillness that you could
bring to it to put it into perspective
and eight months after my house burnt
down i ran into a friend who taught at a
local high school
and he said i've got the perfect place
for you
really i said and i'm always a bit
skeptical when people say things like
that
no honestly he went on it's it's only
three hours away by car and it's not
very expensive and it's probably not
like anywhere you stayed before
hmm i was beginning to get slightly
intrigued what is it
well here my friend hemmed and hoard
well actually it's a it's a catholic
hermitage
this was the wrong answer i had spent 15
years in anglican school
so i had had enough hymnals and crosses
to last me a lifetime
several lifetimes actually but my friend
assured me that he wasn't catholic
nor were most of his students but he
took his classes there every spring
and as he had it even the most
restless distractible testosterone adult
15 year old californian boy only had to
spend
three days in silence and something in
him cooled down
and cleared out he found himself
and i thought anything that works for a
15 year old boy ought to work for me
so i got in my car and i drove three
hours north along the coast
and the roads grew emptier and narrower
and then i turned onto an
even narrower path barely paved that
snaked for two miles up to the top of a
mountain
when i got out of my car the air was
pulsing the whole place was absolutely
silent but
the silence wasn't an absence of noise
it was really a presence of a kind of
energy or quickening
and at my feet was the great still blue
plate
of the pacific ocean all around me were
800 acres of wild dry brush
and i went down to the room in which i
was to be sleeping small but eminently
comfortable it had a
bed and a rocking chair and a long desk
and
even longer picture windows looking out
on a small
private walled garden and then twelve
hundred feet of golden pampas grass
running down to the sea
and i sat down and i began to write
and write and write even though i'd gone
there really to get away from my desk
and by the time i got up four hours had
passed night had fallen
and i went out under this great
overturned salt shaker of stars
and i could see the taillights of cars
disappearing
around the headlands 12 miles to the
south
and it really seemed like my concerns of
the previous day
vanishing and the next day when i woke
up in the absence of telephones and tvs
and laptops
the day seemed to stretch for a thousand
hours
it was really all the freedom i know
when i'm traveling
but it also profoundly felt like coming
home
and i'm not a religious person so i
didn't go to the services i didn't
consult
the monks for guidance i just took walks
along the monastery road
and sent postcards to loved ones i
looked at the clouds
and i did what is hardest of all for me
to do usually
which is nothing at all and i started to
go back to this place
and i noticed that i was doing my most
important work there
invisibly just by sitting still
and certainly coming to my most critical
decisions the way i never could when i
was
racing from the last email to the next
appointment
and i began to think that something in
me had really been crying out for
stillness but
of course i couldn't hear it because i
was running around so much i was like
some crazy guy
who puts on a blindfold and then
complains that he can't see a thing
and i thought back to that wonderful
phrase i had learned as a boy
from seneca in which he says that man is
poor not who has little but
who hankers after more
and of course i'm not suggesting that
anybody here go to a monastery that's
not the point
but i do think it's only by stopping
movement that you can see where to go
and it's only by stepping out of your
life and the world
that you can see what you most deeply
care about
and find a home and i've noticed so many
people now take conscious measures to
sit quietly for 30 minutes
every morning just collecting themselves
in one corner of the room without their
devices
or go running every evening or leave
their cell phones behind
when they go to have a long conversation
with a friend
movement is a fantastic privilege and it
allows us to do so much that
our grandparents could never have
dreamed of doing
but movement ultimately only has a
meaning
if you have a home to go back to
and home in the end is of course not
just
the place where you sleep it's the place
where you stand
thank you
you